Add 0.4 release blog post (#11)
GameDevTecnico/cubos-blog: content/0-4.rst

0.4 is out! 
###########

:date: 2024-10-20 00:00:00
:category: Release
:summary: Cubos 0.4 Release!

.. role:: dim
    :class: m-text m-dim

New 0.4 Features
================

This blog post covers the most important changes, but you can check out the full changelog in our `repository <https://github.com/GameDevTecnico/cubos/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md>`_.

On the Editor
-------------

Project Management and Debugging :dim:`(@RiscadoA)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this release, we were finally able to make our editor, **Tesseratos**, a standalone application!

> Previously, the editor was a part of the engine itself. If you made changes to the game's code, you had to recompile the editor itself and restart it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, the editor was a part of the engine itself, which meant if you made changes to the game's code, you had to recompile the editor as well, and restart it.
```

> Now, the editor has its own executable, and through it, you can open projects, edit their assets, and even debug them - all without having to restart the editor when recompiling the game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the editor has its own executable, and through it, you can open projects, edit their assets, and even debug them - all without having to restart the editor when recompiling the game.
```

> Right now, the UX is still a bit rough, as we've focused on making it work first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this time, the UX is still a bit rough, as we've focused on making it work first.
```
This one is **very** pedantic.

One major hurdle we had to overcome was how to make the editor aware of the project's data types, such as its components and resources.
Before, they were part of the same application, and thus, the editor could simply access them directly.
Now, with the editor being a separate application, we needed a way to share this information across different processes.

> You can read more about it in the "Type Client and Type Server" section at the end of this post, but in short, it is now possible to share type data across different processes, through, for example, a socket.

Reviewer: I'd put here what part of the code changed to allow this. For example, `in short, with the new reflection functionalities, it is now possible (...)`

Previously, importing voxel models required converting `.qb` files into `.pal` and `.grd` files using **Quadrados**, a CLI tool, before they could be used in the engine. Now, with the **Voxel Model Importer Plugin**, the process has been simplified, acting as an interface to handle the conversion process within the editor.

The tool allows you to:

- Assign names to the `.pal` and `.grd` files.
- Choose the file paths where the `.grd` files and the `.pal` file should be saved.
- Specify how many `.grd` files supported by the `.qb` file you want to import.
  
With this tool, importing voxel models into your projects is now faster and easier, allowing for a smoother workflow and less reliance on **Quadrados**.

On the Engine
-------------

Physics with Rotation :dim:`(@fallenatlas)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have **rotation**!

.. image:: images/complex_physics_sample_rotations.gif

Since the start of the physics plugin, we always treated rigid bodies as simple particles.

> This is because the calculations were more intuitive, and it reduced the potential amount of mistakes we could make when first starting out. It also made debugging, of penetration solving for example, easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because it made the calculations more intuitive, and it reduced the potential amount of mistakes we could make when first starting out. It also made debugging - of penetration solving for example - easier.
```

With the particle behaviour stabilized, we decided it was time to expand the plugin to consider rotation, and for that we had to:

- Add Collision Manifold and Collision Points computation.
- Add Components for Rotation.
- Expand the Integrator and Solver to compute rotations.

Collision Manifold and Collision Points
***************************************

Previously, since everything was a particle, we simply computed if there was a collision using SAT, which also returned the normal along which the penetration was the smallest, along with that penetration value.
For rotations we need a ``ContactManifold`` relation, that holds all information about the collision. A *Contact Manifold* is effectively a 2D polygon that details the surface of contact between the 2 bodies. 
In computer physics the bodies inter-penetrate each other, which does not happen in the real world. The manifold is the aproximation of the real contact surface the bodies would have. 

> This polygon is described by it's vertices, in the form of *Contact Points*, all of which contain their position and penetration in ``ContactPointData``.

Reviewer: This one isn't a nitpick, it's a straight up grammar mistake.
```suggestion
This polygon is described by its vertices, in the form of *Contact Points*, all of which contain their position and penetration in ``ContactPointData``.
```

        glm::vec3 localOn1;              ///< Position on the entity of the contact in local coordinates.
        glm::vec3 localOn2;              ///< Position on the other entity of the contact in local coordinates.
        float penetration;               ///< Penetration of the contact point. Always positive.
    };

    struct ContactManifold
    {
        cubos::core::ecs::Entity entity;      ///< Entity to which the normal is relative to.
        glm::vec3 normal;                     ///< A contact normal shared by all contacts in this manifold,
                                              ///< expressed in the local space of the first entity.
        std::vector<ContactPointData> points; ///< Contact points of this manifold.
    };

With this change, our narrow phase firstly checks for collision with SAT, since it's cheaper, and only then computes the manifold.

The collisions sample was also enhanced so we could visualize this information.

.. image:: images/collision_sample_manifold_demo.gif

New Components
**************

The next thing to add were Components to support rotations, such as ``Inertia``, ``Torque``, and ``AngularVelocity``, just to name a few.

> To facilitate the creation, we also added automatic computation of the inertia tensor for the ``BoxCollisionShape``, which is performed upon adding the ``Inertia`` component and every time ``Mass`` or the dimentions of the shape are changed.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "creation" refers to

Expand the Integrator and Solver
********************************

The last step was to add rotation in the Integrator and ``PenetrationConstraint`` Solving. 

The integrator simply takes the ``AngularImpulse`` and ``Torque`` components and handles them similarly to the linear movement components.

> We want to note that the ``Force`` component also holds a torque vector, in our current design. This is because our way of adding force on a point of the body is done through ``Force``, meaning, it has an hidden torque vector, which we also use in the Integration phase.

Reviewer: This sentence is very confusing. You have toque in the Force component, because the Force component has a hidden torque vector? It sounds like we're going in circles.

.. code-block:: cpp
    
    struct Force
    {
        void addForceOnPoint(glm::vec3 force, glm::vec3 localPoint, glm::vec3 centerOfMass)
        {
            mForce += force;
            mTorque = glm::cross(localPoint - centerOfMass, force);
        }

    private:
        glm::vec3 mForce = {0.0F, 0.0F, 0.0F};
        glm::vec3 mTorque = {0.0F, 0.0F, 0.0F};
    };

> The ``PenetrationConstraint`` is now solved for each contact point, using their local anchor for relative velocity, separation and angular velocity calculation at each step. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``PenetrationConstraint`` is now solved for each contact point, using their local anchor for relative velocity, separation, and angular velocity calculation at each step. 
```

> This involved changing the constraint itself to also have ``PenetrationConstraintPointData``, which are the same as the manifold points but with extra information to keep track of the constraint solving.

Reviewer: Not sure about this one, since I don't know the technicalities, and the first part of the sentence indicates singular and the second plural. If it's meant to be singular:
```suggestion
This involved changing the constraint itself to also have ``PenetrationConstraintPointData``, which is the same as a manifold point but with extra information to keep track of the constraint solving.
```
If it's meant to be plural:
```suggestion
This involved changing the constraint itself to also have a number of ``PenetrationConstraintPointData``, which are the same as the manifold points but with extra information to keep track of the constraint solving.
```

        // separation
        float normalMass;    ///< Mass to use for normal impulse calculation.
        float normalImpulse; ///< Accumulated impulse for separation.

        // friction
        float frictionMass1;    ///< Mass to use for friction impulse calculation along the first tangent..
        float frictionMass2;    ///< Mass to use for friction impulse calculation along the second tangent..
        float frictionImpulse1; ///< Accumulated impulse for friction along the first tangent.
        float frictionImpulse2; ///< Accumulated impulse for friction along the second tangent.
    };

    struct PenetrationConstraint
    {
        cubos::core::ecs::Entity entity; ///< Entity to which the normal is relative to.
        glm::vec3 normal;                ///< Normal of contact on the surface of the entity.
        float friction;                  ///< Friction of the constraint.
        float restitution;               ///< Restitution coefficient of the constraint.

        std::vector<PenetrationConstraintPointData> points; ///< Contact points in the contact manifold.
    };

> And that's it for this very short summary of the changes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it for this very short summary of the physics changes. 
```

Our implementation is still far from perfect. As you might have seen in the sample clip, some movements still don't look very natural, and the boxes should have stayed on top of each other, which is something we'll be working on over the next releases.

To wrap up, as we promised in the previous release blog post, we've added the ``PhysicsMaterial`` component, which allows users to fine tune be friction and bounciness behaviour of each body. Check it out in our documentation!

Cascading Shadow Maps :dim:`(@tomas7770)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the previous release, we introduced **shadows**.

> As shown in the release blog post, this had a significant impact on the quality of Cubos's graphics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the release blog post, this had a significant impact on the quality of Cubos' graphics.
```

However, due to the complexity and time it took to implement this feature, we were only able to support
spot lights, the type of light for which it's easiest to cast shadows. This obviously restricted the

> scenarios where this impact was visible. For this release we aimed to extend shadows support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scenarios where shadows were visible. For this release we aimed to extend shadows support
```

to directional lights, leaving only point light shadows to be implemented.

> Here are some comparison screenshots showing the difference that having directional shadows can make.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some comparison screenshots showing the difference directional shadows can make.
```

Input Axis Deadzones :dim:`(@kuukitenshi)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously, dealing with input sources that exhibited drift, like older gamepad joysticks, required developers to manually filter out noise from input data. 

In this release, input deadzones can now be configured directly within the bindings asset, allowing players to adjust it in the settings for their controllers to filter out unwanted noise.

This enhancement significantly simplifies input handling and ensures a smoother and more reliable gameplay experience, especially for games that heavily rely on precise controller input.

Ortographic Cameras :dim:`(@mkuritsu)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously we only had support for perspective cameras in Cubos, and additionally, perspective matrix computations were duplicated all over the code.
To address this, we've added a new generic ``Camera`` component that holds the projection matrix of the current camera in use.
Now, the ``PerspectiveCamera`` component is only used to fill in the ``Camera`` component with the correct projection matrix, and code needing the projection matrix can simply query the ``Camera`` component.

> With this, we decoupled the camera type from the rest of code, allowing us to add a new ``OrtographicCamera`` component uses an ortographic projection instead of a perspective one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this, we decoupled the camera type from the rest of code, allowing us to add a new ``OrtographicCamera`` component which uses an ortographic projection instead of a perspective one.
```

On the Core
-------------

Spans for Profiling and Tracing :dim:`(@roby2014)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In our ongoing efforts to improve metrics and address performance issues, we are excited to announce the implementation of a new feature for telemetry: Tracing. 
This addition will significantly enhance our ability to monitor and understand the execution flow of applications built with **Cubos**.

Tracing allows developers to track the execution of their code by creating spans that represent specific periods of execution. 
This capability makes it easier to log messages and visualize the flow of an application, providing valuable insights into performance and behaviour.

In **Cubos**, tracing is facilitated through a set of macros defined in ``core/tel/tracing.hpp``:
- ``CUBOS_SPAN_TRACE``
- ``CUBOS_SPAN_DEBUG``
- ``CUBOS_SPAN_INFO``

> From now on, the logger level will be shared across all telemetry components. You can set it by using ``cubos::core::tel::level`` method.

Reviewer: Does this mean that all telemetry components share the same logging level? If you so, it really should be rephrased.
```suggestion
From now on, all telemetry components share the same logging level. You can set it by using ``cubos::core::tel::level`` method.
```

> This means that, e.g, trace spans will only be registered if the telemetry level is trace.

Reviewer: I might be reading this wrong, but shouldn't it be the logger level that is set? Do we have a telemetry level?
```suggestion
This means that, as an example, trace spans will only be registered if the logger level is set to trace.
```

> We also moved the other components to ``tel`` namespace (metrics and logging). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also moved the other components to the ``tel`` namespace (metrics and logging). 
```

> Here's a simple code snippet on how it works and it's output:

Reviewer: No one knows how to use `it's` and `its` properly 😔
```suggestion
Here's a simple code snippet on how it works and its output:
```

Swapping OpenAL for Miniaudio :dim:`(@diogomsmiranda, @Dageus)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release marks the beginning of an exciting new chapter for Cubos: the Audio Plugin.
But before we could start working on the plugin itself, we had to make some changes to the audio backend.
Previously, we were using OpenAL for audio, which no longer aligned with our vision for Cubos, so we decided to switch to `miniaudio.h <https://miniaud.io>`_, a lightweight, single-file audio library easy to integrate and use while also sharing the same license as Cubos.
We implemented a new ``AudioContext`` abstraction on the core library, which hides the underlying audio library from the rest of the engine.

In the next release of **Cubos**, we're planning to have a fully functional audio plugin, which will allow you to play sounds and music in your games!

Type Client and Type Server :dim:`(@RiscadoA)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To separate **Tesseratos** from the engine into a separate process, we needed a way to share type data across different processes.

> This is because the editor needs to know about the project's data types, such as its components and resources, to be able to work with them, for example, to show them in the editor's UI, or to edit scene assets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because the editor needs to know about the project's data types, such as its components and resources, to be able to do work with them, such as showing them in the editor's UI, or editing scene assets.
```

To solve this problem, we've added the ``TypeServer`` and ``TypeClient`` classes to the core's reflection module.
The editor contains a ``TypeClient``, the game contains a ``TypeServer`` and both communicate through an abstract stream, which currently is implemented using a TCP socket.

Our reflection system is based on the concept of "traits". A trait is a piece of metadata that describes a type, such as its name, its fields, and its methods.
Both the ``TypeClient`` and the ``TypeServer`` allow registering serialization and deserialization functions for each trait, so that they can be sent across the stream.

The protocol itself is relatively simple:

> #. The client sends a list of the names of the traits it supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. The client sends a list with the names of the traits it supports.
```
Just to avoid using `of the` so much

> #. The client sends a list of the names of the traits it supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. The client - the editor - sends a list of the names of the traits it supports.
```

> #. The client sends a list of the types it already knows about (for example, primitive types like ``int`` and ``float``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. The client sends a list with the types it already knows about (for example, primitive types like ``int`` and ``float``).
```
ditto

> #. The server sends a list with the types that the client doesn't know about yet. This includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. The server - the game - sends a list with the types that the client doesn't know about yet. This includes:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Of course, with such a large team, these meetings were becoming increasingly long and unproductive.

So, we decided to split the big team into smaller teams, each with its own focus. As of now, we have the following teams:

- **Community**: responsible for managing the more meta aspects of the project, such as the blog, the Discord server, and the social media.
- **Graphics**: responsible for any graphics-related features, such as voxels, UI and gizmos rendering.
- **Physics**: responsible for the physics and collisions plugins.
- **Tools**: responsible for **Tesseratos**, **Quadrados** and all other kinds of tooling.
- **Wildcard**: catch-all team for any other kind of feature that doesn't fit in the other teams.

Now each team meets weekly to discuss their progress and plans, and we have a big meeting less frequently to discuss the project as a whole.

Next Steps
==========

In the next release, which should be out by the end of November, we're planning to work on the following features:

* Scene editing through the new standalone editor, **Tesseratos**.
* An Audio plugin, using the new Audio Context abstraction we've added in this release.

> * ?? TODO: add graphics plans here

Reviewer: heyo?

        float frictionMass2;    ///< Mass to use for friction impulse calculation along the second tangent..
        float frictionImpulse1; ///< Accumulated impulse for friction along the first tangent.
        float frictionImpulse2; ///< Accumulated impulse for friction along the second tangent.
    };

    struct PenetrationConstraint
    {
        cubos::core::ecs::Entity entity; ///< Entity to which the normal is relative to.
        glm::vec3 normal;                ///< Normal of contact on the surface of the entity.
        float friction;                  ///< Friction of the constraint.
        float restitution;               ///< Restitution coefficient of the constraint.

        std::vector<PenetrationConstraintPointData> points; ///< Contact points in the contact manifold.
    };

And that's it for this very short summary of the physics changes. 
Our implementation is still far from perfect. As you might have seen in the sample clip, some movements still don't look very natural, and the boxes should have stayed on top of each other, which is something we'll be working on over the next releases.

> To wrap up, as we promised in the previous release blog post, we've added the ``PhysicsMaterial`` component, which allows users to fine tune be friction and bounciness behaviour of each body. Check it out in our documentation!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To wrap up, as we promised in the previous release blog post, we've added the ``PhysicsMaterial`` component, which allows users to fine tune the friction and bounciness behaviour of each body. Check it out in our documentation!
```

This seems to be a typo.
